---
title: 'Freqgen: A tool for generating DNA sequences with specified amino acid, codon, and $k$-mer frequencies'
tags:
  - Python
  - bioinformatics
  - computational biology
  - biotechnology
  - genetic algorithms
authors:
  - name: Benjamin D. Lee
    orcid: 0000-0002-7133-8397
    affiliation: "1, 2" # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: Paul G. Gamble
    orcid: 0000-0000-0000-0000
    affiliation: 2
affiliations:
 - name: School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
   index: 1
 - name: In-Q-Tel Lab41
   index: 2
date: 7 September 2018
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

A variety of forces affect the distribution of the frequencies of nucleotides in
DNA. For example, GC-content, the ratio of the amount of Gs and Cs to As and Ts,
is greater in regions with more recombination
[@spencerHumanPolymorphismRecombination]. Generalizing beyond individual
nucleotides, the distribution of $k$-mers, subsequences of length $k$, is also
neither random nor uniform. These biases have been capitalized upon in genetic
engineering [@al-saifUUUADinucleotide2012], vaccine production
[@tullochRNAVirusAttenuation2014], phylogenetics
[@deorowiczKmerdbInstantEvolutionary2018], and metagenomics
[@perryDistinguishingMicrobialGenome2010].

To further study and take advantage of these biases, the ability to generate
sequences *in silico* with given $k$-mer frequencies is vital. Prior work
[@liuNullSeqToolGenerating2016] has shown the possibility of generating
sequences with given amino acid usage and GC-content, albeit not with a
specified amino acid sequence. Similarly, other software packages
[@gasparEuGeneMaximizingSynthetic2012; @guimaraesDTailorAutomatedAnalysis2014]
have been developed for synthetic gene design, allowing amino acid sequence
specification, but have not focused specifically on matching $k$-mer usage
frequencies for $k>2$. Here we introduce `Freqgen`, a software tool to generate
sequences that simultaneously meet amino acid, codon, and $k$-mer usage targets
for arbitrary values of $k$. We call this approach to sequence generation
*$k$-mer optimization*, a generalization of the concept of codon optimization.

There are two distinct uses of this tool. The first is in synthetic gene design,
in which $k$-mers have a significant role on protein expression
[@al-saifUUUADinucleotide2012]. For example, users may wish to recode sequences
to simultaneously match the host organism's codon usage bias while minimizing
unfavorable dinucelotide frequency. In this case, the specific amino acid
sequence is known and passed directly to `Freqgen`. The second use of `Freqgen`
is the generation of novel coding sequences sharing amino acid, codon, and/or
$k$-mer frequencies with that of a target set of sequences. For this use case,
the amino acid sequence is not known and is generated by `Freqgen` by choosing
amino acids with the same frequency as they appear in the target set and then
performing DNA-level $k$-mer optimization optimization on the generated
sequence. This application is useful for the purposes of data augmentation or as
a null model [@liuNullSeqToolGenerating2016]. In some domains of machine
learning such as deep learning, massive amounts of data are required to train
models. However, due to genomes' limited sizes, there may not be enough data on
which to learn. `Freqgen` seeks to solve this problem by allowing for the
creation of sequences that share the same $k$-mer frequency distribution, codon
usage, and amino acid usage as target sequences.

`Freqgen` accomplishes this optimization by means of a genetic algorithm, which
seeks to identify the sequence of codons that have $k$-mer and/or codon
frequencies most similar to a set of target frequencies, as defined by
minimizing either the Euclidean distance or Jensen-Shannon divergence, as
implemented in `dit`[@jamesDitPythonPackage2018], between the sets. By operating
on the codon level as opposed to the nucleotide level, `Freqgen` is able to
ensure that the amino acid sequence is held constant, greatly speeding up the
search of the solution space.

# Acknowledgements

# References
